.Dd March 15, 2026
.Dt RUST-FIND 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rust-find
.Nd faithful Rust port of FreeBSD find(1)
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl H | Fl L | Fl P
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl x
.Ar path ...
.Op Ar expression
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a faithful Rust port of FreeBSD's
.Xr find 1 .
It walks one or more file hierarchies and evaluates a predicate expression for
each entry.
The command-line structure follows the BSD utility closely: start paths appear
first, followed by the expression.
.Pp
Adjacent primaries are treated as an implicit logical AND.
The operators
.Cm \&!
and
.Cm -not
negate an expression,
.Cm -o
and
.Cm -or
perform logical OR, and parentheses may be used for grouping.
.Pp
The binary in this repository is named
.Nm ,
but the interface is designed to match FreeBSD
.Xr find 1
for the implemented feature set.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "-maxdepth Ar depth"
.It Fl H
Accept command-line symlinks in the BSD-compatible option set.
In the current implementation this flag is parsed but does not yet produce
distinct traversal behavior.
.It Fl L
Follow symbolic links during traversal.
.It Fl P
Do not follow symbolic links.
This is the default traversal mode.
.It Fl d
Visit directory contents before the directory itself.
.It Fl x
Accept the BSD-compatible no-cross-device flag.
In the current implementation this flag is parsed but cross-device pruning is
not yet enforced.
.El
.Sh PRIMARIES
.Bl -tag -width "-mindepth Ar depth"
.It Fl name Ar pattern
Match the basename of the current entry against a shell-style glob.
.It Fl iname Ar pattern
Case-insensitive variant of
.Fl name .
.It Fl path Ar pattern
Match the full path against a shell-style glob.
.It Fl ipath Ar pattern
Case-insensitive variant of
.Fl path .
.It Fl wholename Ar pattern
Alias for
.Fl path .
.It Fl iwholename Ar pattern
Alias for
.Fl ipath .
.It Fl type Ar f | d | l | b | c | p | s
Match by file type.
On non-Unix targets the special Unix-only types
.Cm b ,
.Cm c ,
.Cm p ,
and
.Cm s
evaluate to false rather than causing a build failure.
.It Fl empty
Match empty regular files and empty directories.
.It Fl maxdepth Ar depth
Match only entries at depth less than or equal to
.Ar depth .
.It Fl mindepth Ar depth
Match only entries at depth greater than or equal to
.Ar depth .
.It Fl size Ar value
Match by size.
The numeric value may be followed by one of the suffixes
.Cm c ,
.Cm k ,
.Cm M ,
or
.Cm G .
Without a suffix, sizes are interpreted in 512-byte blocks.
The optional
.Cm +
and
.Cm -
prefixes mean greater than or less than.
.It Fl mtime Ar n
Match by age in whole days.
The optional
.Cm +
and
.Cm -
prefixes mean greater than or less than.
.It Fl newer Ar file
Match entries newer than
.Ar file .
.It Fl print
Print the path followed by a newline.
.It Fl print0
Print the path followed by a NUL byte.
.It Fl delete
Delete the matched file or empty directory.
.It Fl prune
Evaluate true for the current entry and mark it for pruning.
In the current implementation the predicate is parsed and evaluated, but the
active walker does not yet stop descending into that directory.
.It Fl true
Always evaluate true.
.It Fl false
Always evaluate false.
.El
.Sh OPERATORS
.Bl -tag -width "-and"
.It Ar expr1 expr2
Implicit logical AND.
.It Fl a , Fl and
Explicit logical AND.
.It Fl o , Fl or
Logical OR.
.It Cm \&! , Fl not
Logical NOT.
.It Pq Ar expression
Group subexpressions.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Pp
The command exits with status 0 on success and non-zero if traversal or
expression handling reports an error.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Find Rust source files under the current directory:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
rust-find . -name "*.rs"
.Ed
.It
Find a file ignoring case:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
rust-find . -iname "main.rs"
.Ed
.It
Restrict traversal depth:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
rust-find . -maxdepth 2 -type f
.Ed
.It
Combine predicates with OR:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
rust-find . "(" -name "*.rs" -o -name "*.toml" ")"
.Ed
.El
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
.Nm
is positioned as a faithful port of FreeBSD's
.Xr find 1 ,
meaning the implementation is deliberately anchored to the FreeBSD interface
and semantics rather than to GNU extensions or a new command shape.
.Pp
The current codebase does not yet implement every edge case of the original
utility.
Documented gaps presently include distinct
.Fl H
handling, enforced
.Fl x
behavior, and traversal pruning for
.Fl prune .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr find 1
.Sh AUTHORS
Ported to Rust from the FreeBSD
.Pa usr.bin/find/
utility lineage.
